---
layout: post
title: "Fisher Information Matrix"
tags: [optimization, math, ai]
published: true
permalink: /posts/fisher/
---

Say we want to measure suprise of the event occuring. We assume we have the definition of underlying probability space $(\Omega, \mathcal{F}, \Bbb{P}).$
That is, we have exact probabilities of every element of $\mathcal{F}.$ Now let us define suprise function $s : \mathcal{F} \rightarrow \Bbb{R}.$
Increase of the probability of the event occuring should be inversly proportional to suprise of the event occuring. So for $A\in\mathcal{F}$ we need inverse relation between $s(A)$ and $\Bbb{P}(A)$. Increasing probability of the event should decrease suprise. Thus let us define $s(A) = f(\Bbb{P}(A))$ and then solve for $f$.
Suprise of two independent events $A$ and $B$ should be equal to sum of suprises of respective parts.\\
$$s(A)+s(B) = s(A\cap B)  \implies f(\Bbb{P}(A)) + f(\Bbb{P}(B)) = f(\Bbb{P}(A\cap B)) = f(\Bbb{P}(A)\Bbb{P}(B))$$
Now, it is reasonable to assume that $f$ is continuous. We can guess family of solutions immediately, put $f(p) = k\log(p).$ However to preserve inverse property of suprise and probability of an event occuring take $k=-1.$
Thus, we define $s(A) = -\log(\Bbb{P}(A)).$
Let $X: (\Omega, \mathcal{F}) \rightarrow  (\Bbb{R}, \mathcal{B}(R))$ be a measurable function.
Hence, $\forall E\in \mathcal{B}(R) X^{-1}(E)\in \mathcal{F}.$ Of course that condition is crucial, we are interested in probabilities like $\Bbb{P}(X\in E), E\in \mathcal{B}(R).$ That is why we need preimage of codomain sigma algebra as an element of $\mathcal{F}.$
Naturally, we want to define suprise of random variable. We want it to be expected value of random variable over its domain. Measure theoretic definition is invariant wether random variable is discrete or continuous. Thus:
$$H(X) = \Bbb{E}[s(X)] = -\Bbb{E}[\log(X)]$$
